okay hi everybody
um thanks for being here this morning
for day two of distant early warnings my
name is Wade and I'm the associate
curator here at gray area and I'm really
thrilled to introduce to Forrest Brown
Jr who is an Alabama raise ex-american
Rhythm analyst writer and representative
of the make techno black again campaign
as Speaker music he channels the
African-American modernist tradition of
Rhythm and Soul music as an intellectual
Sight and Sound generational trauma on
Juneteenth of 2020 he received he
released the album black nationalist
Sonic Weaponry on planet Mew and his
written work explores the links between
the black experience and industrialized
labor systems and black innovation in
electronic music his book is available
for purchase on the back table check it
out after the talk thanks guys
[Applause]
yeah
hi thanks for having me
um let's see
foreign
just checking for the slideshow here
cool so before I start
I'll play
actually maybe I'll just start like this
so yeah hi I'm DeForest Brown Jr this is
uh the cover of my book assembling a
black counterculture and
um
an interesting artwork done by a guy
named Abdul Kareem Hawk who is
an artist that's responsible for quite a
lot of the
art on Detroit techno releases from the
late 80s until present and it was really
important to me to have him build the
visual identity of the book because
You know despite popular belief techno
is not music that is a generic
supplement for a kind of like mood
backdrop for a drug-induced nightlife
economies and Transcendence but it's
actually a form of
um how should I put it
something I call stereophonic
intelligence it's a form of meditation a
form of World building and a form of
coded communication that is completely
outside of euro-american Enlightenment
thought and so much of my work around
techno is deconstructing the crude usage
of techno as again a supplement for
Hedonism and debauchery and
repositioning it reframing it
diagnostically as a kind of um
just reframing it within the black
radical tradition and
but yeah the main thing I like to start
with before I get into my talks is that
this artwork takes place in the year
2100 we will not live long enough to see
what is happening in this image and that
was very important for me as the book
actually ends on March 6th of 2020 with
the opening of Carl Craig's
um party after party Exhibition at DIA
Beacon which will also be opening at um
La Mocha I believe in a few months but
what that exhibition was was um
I sort of we'll call it an automated
Club funded by the Ford foundation and
Dia to be a tomb for techno it was meant
to reposition techno as this world and
to actually put it inside of a kind of
factory inside of an art exhibition and
to culminate 30 years of this sort of
exported
audio experience this exported artifact
into something that would effectively
end the conversation of techno
ironically the day that that exhibition
started the first covet case actually
um hit in New York city so the book ends
on that day and
the talk picks up a few years later
but the main thing is
we will never see what's happening in
that picture
but first I'll play one of the first
techno tracks
um from the group Cybertron called clear
red wine
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
so
I played that to kind of set the tone
for what techno
ought to be as opposed to what we know
it to be what that song is effectively
about is about the end of the world
it is about
completely clearing out the United
States of America and the rest of the
entire western civilization of all of
its sins and starting over it was
inspired by Samuel Samuel L Delaney
which was a favorite author of Rick
Davis who worked with Juan Atkins the
theoretical inventor of techno
um
Rick Davis was a interesting guy he was
a decade older than Juan Atkins who was
about 17 at the time when he was working
with his first electronic instruments um
the 808 drum machine and the core game
S10 when Atkins was working with the 808
at a time when the entire electronic
instrument industry was effectively
going bankrupt people were not buying
electronic equipment so Juan Atkins
actually is quite he knows that he was
the first independent electronic
musician because he was the only person
with the 808 you couldn't buy him
anywhere and that's something I find
really interesting as a starting point
here is thinking about techno as a kind
of um means of reverse engineering and
reading
Industries reading distribution channels
on a global scale and and doing this as
a we'll say marginalized individual in a
dying city of the future in Detroit a
city that was abandoned shortly after
the 67 race riots shortly after the
murder of Malcolm X and Martin Luther
King I guess Martin Luther King died the
year after
um but we'll get more into this the main
thing about Rick Davis was that
he was a Vietnam vet so four decade
older than one Atkins had collected some
instruments over in Vietnam but his main
job was to defend a counterintelligence
or a Central Intelligence Agency
laboratory in
Vietnam and he was over there with
American soldiers white nationalists who
performed quite a bit of friendly fire
on the black Americans who are the
majority of people that were drafted for
the Vietnam War and so there's some
interesting things that Rick Davis knew
about this country and its
expansion abroad will say that actually
filters into some of the very first
techno releases despite people not
really keeping up with that but very
very briefly I'll play some of Rick
Davis's compositions before he was
working with on Juan Atkins this is
about uh in 1978. this track is called
methane C
[Music]
and my own fate
oh I write my write my own
but I
am my
mind oh God God
[Music]
yeah you get it
so moving on to the slides
oh wait uh oh get out of there so
Juan Atkins was an interesting person so
while working with this former U.S
military veteran which we all know how
veterans were treated when they came
back from the Vietnam War you know it's
actually really interesting because Rick
Davis came back and you know he was
looking into the hippie movement that
was happening at the time and you know
looking at the Charles Manson Murders
and he's like it's kind of crazy that
like this shit's going on after I've
been over there like fighting random
like counterintelligence Vietnamese
people like like what is this
um
yeah
yeah we'll get into this more but the
main thing I find interesting about Juan
Atkins as a young man was that
he actually had quite a number of
definitions for what he wanted techno to
be and him and Rick Davis together
created a dictionary a sort of um
superstructural book that they called
The Grid but the main thing is that what
techno is is and I'll kind of uh insert
a few words here techno is black music
that sounds like technology
rather than music
made with technology so oftentimes
people would like to think that
craftwork invented techno craftwork did
not invent techno
they just didn't they did receive
government so you know nationalist
socialist income they did receive
electronic instruments from again
government and private organizations in
an attempt to propagate and sell the
idea of using electronic instruments but
they did not invent electronic music in
fact craft work was actually hanging out
on U.S military bases in Germany and
listening to disco and James Brown and
Sun Ron Pharaoh Sanders and before they
were craftwork they had a group called
organization which they copied all of
those acts and made a pretty nice record
out of it but you know then they started
working with the Motown engineer and
became the craft worker that we know
today meanwhile juanakis's father was
actually booking electronic music like
sort of like Michael Henderson Herbie
Hancock and a sidemen
um to play jazz fusion all throughout
the Detroit throughout the 70s so Juan
Atkins actually
one of the things I try to talk about
with techno is that Detroit has an over
a hundred year long history of
African-American music that precedes
techno and filters into techno so when
we're talking about techno music we're
not necessarily talking about you know
pushing buttons and knob twiddling it's
a it's an entire history that has been
you know an entire 400 year history of
human bodies being treated like currency
migrating across an industrializing
colonizing
um Earth killing
nation state to then become
it just feels filters in into this
technology and then comes out the whole
point of techno is making the machines
talk and making it say some things that
I don't think the colonizers really
wanted to say
oh let me boom so house music separately
from techno actually came after techno
house music did not come before techno
what happened was one Atkins had a
friend or an acquaintance named Derek
May who was a number of years younger
than him and a good friend of his
younger brother
May stole in a 909 drum machine from
Juan Atkins went to Chicago where
Frankie Knuckles was playing
what we'll call House Records which is a
kind of you can imagine House Records
being like a house wine Frankie Knuckles
worked for billboard and will receive
promo records like months before they
were put on the market and he would play
these vinyl records you know and mix
them and
play in a party or a club called the
power plant
Derek May takes a 909 over to Frankie
Knuckles again without One icons knowing
One icons insisted on telling Derek may
not to make music because he wanted
techno to be his his intellectual
property Derek May ignores this and
sells the drum machine to Frankie
Knuckles Frankie Knuckles then goes on
to make house music
um
just very briefly I'll play a few more
tracks I'm gonna play one atkins's
techno music just to give us a sense of
these differences
and then I'll play a track for Marshall
Jefferson
so
[Applause]
[Music]
and then I'll play Marshall Jefferson's
move your body but before I do that
Marshall Jefferson was an interesting
person who was a post office worker
who's
parents were actually Black Panthers and
he worked at the Universal Studios in
Chicago which was the first music uh
sort of company to develop the isolated
vocal mics that would allow for pop
music to be a thing that was made and
Marshall Jefferson's idea for house
music was to expand it to being more
than the sort of House Records that a DJ
would pull from behind them and would
play into being a kind of DIY Soul music
um kind of project so you'd have like a
live drummer in the studio a vocalists
maybe a drum machine but most of the
work from these original house tracks
were actually something similar to
Philly International records or or
Motown and were made pretty
crudely in a studio but again for this
difference here is Marshall Jefferson's
Move Your Body
[Music]
[Applause]
and then we'll play techno again
[Music]
okay so
live one take electronic music being
recorded into a four track recorder then
taken to
a vinyl plant which was left over from
hotel Studios to then press
live techno music onto a vinyl artifact
and then house music as a sort of
acoustimatic Studio music DIY Studio
music
so those are the initial differences of
house and techno that I wanted to kind
of establish is that these musics are
cousins theoretically but completely
unrelated one Atkins was making this
music in his basement and most techno
was happening as a solitary experience
and we could think of someone like J.R.R
Tolkien or or you know
uh you can think of Lovecraft or proust
or any of these like sort of sickly
novelists that were like building worlds
in their heads that's what techno is
house music it's for queer people who
want to have fun and we're like
expressing themselves during you know
the AIDS epidemic and the crack epidemic
um so one's Community the other is uh
sort of solipsistic and kind of the
squirrel building thing
but
we'll move on for this and two
so Abdul Kadeem Hawk had a quote that I
really liked about what techno was which
is something of a higher dimensional
Soul technology that these artists
access to reach the highest dates of
their Soundcraft Allah these images this
is what techno is is the emergence of a
mythology in an entire world completely
separate from this crude and gross
technological one that we've built over
three waves of colonialism
so when One icons first started working
on techno he was actually taking a class
called future studies at a high school
in Detroit and or in Belleville slightly
outside of Detroit and
in this class he had to read Alvin
toffler's the third wave which talks
about human Colonial development from
you know that period right there when we
were nomadic and then a millennia later
we start you know setting up or people
start setting up
civilizations on the side of rivers and
they started extracting from the land
they start trying to figure out how to
manipulate the land to do things for it
um you know then people got really good
at manipulating the land and human
bodies for labor and they start to
industrialize it to get it you know to
stimulate perpetually and then you keep
going to that third wave right there the
information era which don't get too
confident because that now on the third
wave was in 1980.
that fourth wave there
was in 2020.
which what the fourth wave is is a move
from the information era at this point
at which you know we were moving our
currency off the gold standard at a
point where we were
building digital infrastructures to
digitize the things that have been
colonized into something into movable
bits into the fourth wave which is more
of a stage of planetary computation in
which we can more or less inventory the
entire planet as a resource instead of
as a beautiful living thing that we
should be respecting and participating
with
that line up there the hypothetical
carrying capacity of spaceship earth
which is a reference from Buck Minister
Fuller that I oftentimes like to tell
people that's right now or if you see me
perform tonight
that's right then and then after tonight
we have a choice
total overshoot and collapse or
web 3 complete cybernices technosis uh
Global Consciousness era I choose
collapse
but
one of the main things I found
interesting about techno is that
there's actually an interesting story
that spreads across the entire thing
starting at 1655 was which was when the
first hundred Africans were dropped off
in Pier 17 of New York City
um as the seed investment into the
company that would become the economic
unliberal Republic of the United States
of America and
no
and that slave trade will continue until
1867. ironically my great grandfather
who I knew as a child was actually freed
from slavery in 1930 and we have his
paperwork to prove it
and then you have the migration from
people like my family I'm from
Birmingham Alabama if you've ever seen
you know the images of people being like
bitten by dogs or hosed down that's my
family I grew up right there so after
years of terrorism years of bombings
from the FBI and white supremacists
throughout the state to sort of stop the
Civil Rights Movement a lot of my family
began to migrate up north and you get
this Great Migration and that's where
techno happens techno is a post-civil
rights music that comes after the point
of integration after the point of being
able to tap into the global economy to
buy instruments to then become the
Techno Rebels that you saw on the last
slide
to kind of rap bring this back to
mcluhan one of the big Inspirations for
the book for me was actually from
Marshall mcluhan's War and Peace in the
global village and I really love this
quote because this I it really resonated
me when I read it that the American
Negro and I love that he uses the legal
term for black Americans as opposed to
the sort of politically correct term of
African-American which emerged in the
1980s to accomplish him to accomplish
immigrants and this actual point of
integration
the American Negro who has long
coexisted with this literate culture
especially feels anger when he gets
turned on because he can see that these
cause that the causes of his degradation
are to be found in a technology that is
now repudiated by his Masters when the
electric age began to be felt during and
after the first world war the war of
negro Jazz walled up to conquer the
white Jazz was a negro product because
it is directly related to speech Rhythm
rather than to any printed page or score
in 2016 while I was working at it or
working as an unpaid intern at a
multi-million dollar Music Magazine
which the dance music industry prior to
covet was worth 7.4 billion dollars
I had to write a news story again for
free from one of my heroes theoro Parish
in which after
the first because we're we've gone
through three black lives matter
protests moments I think we all remember
the George Floyd one but there were two
prior to that during the first one
Theo Paris says how do you dance when we
still swing from trees when we still are
murdered in front of our loved ones and
we can keep going down that but it's uh
you know I often like to ask people all
over the world when I travel the
electronic music circuit why
why are people dancing I was a East
Coast editor at mixmag which was the
first electronic music magazine in the
1980s to
basically steal and reframe techno for a
global audience and as I tried to talk
about these histories I was fired for
not being a cultural fit which is
something you've probably heard you know
out here in Silicon Valley out here in
San Francisco in the Bay Area
um you've probably heard from Google as
they were firing their black employees
or heard from Zuckerberg when he was
firing his black employees for
questioning this fourth and final if you
will stage of colonialism
I just like to show him because I I say
that he's daddy he's the daddy of the
hippie movement and this is where the
title of the book comes from assembling
a black counterculture because I found
it interesting I was reading this at the
same time that I was reading the third
wave in 2010 and that last line there
that the situation of black youth
requires such special treatment as would
run to book length in its own right and
I I read that line and said interesting
this book is not for me
so I better write one
and I'll end with this slide
the idea of resistance is very old a
more important question is what are the
conditions that caused it
so underground resistance is a second
wave of Detroit techno that emerged
actually out of the 67 riots Mike Mike
Banks and Jeff Mills were there in their
houses as tanks were rolling down the
streets you know they were watching
black people being murdered they watched
the entire city go up in flames and that
was the inspiration for underground
resistance and when they performed after
the wall fall in Berlin in 1982 they
premiered a sound called Sonic Destroyer
that would actually Define the thing
that we know to be techno now the sort
of boom boom boom thing that everyone
seems to think techno is but let's see
I'll play that and then I'll wrap this
up
you can kind of hear like the bognorian
strings here they're really kind of
playing with this German thing
and I'll end this
oh now
yourself
to the program
now
thank you
[Applause]
thanks so much to Forest
um yeah thanks for having me you know it
I really appreciated that you know
little briefer between the difference
between techno and house music because
you'd be surprised that people don't
know
um so you know something that you know I
always I'm curious about how we can
think through this kind of work in a
really practical and like on the street
level and so how you know as we think
about the future and we think about what
Marshall mcluhan is trying to impart on
us how do we look to techno and how you
know to uh I don't want to say read the
future but how do we look to techno in
order to understand what's coming next
on a cultural level
um and what does it mean to to support
that work yeah
Marshall mcluhan's understanding of
media was like obviously very
interesting because he wasn't looking at
it as this thing outside of ourselves
but this thing that like we extended
into and we're kind of part and parcel
with and that's the one thing I love
about techno is the sort of coded
information that would be embedded
inside of these sounds and exchanged
amongst people throughout Detroit and
later the world
um but I would say the way to support
this work is to actually go to Detroit
go buy the records actually learn the
history and the thing is when you buy
these records like actually go buy the
physical records which was something I
tried to do while writing the book you
find that there's pages on pages of
liner notes where they're actually
making these predictions of the future
and as that last track I played they're
literally talking about
the programmers if you will of the
Industrial Age The Information Age and
they're it they're asking us to actually
to really consider what is happening
around around us
so much for that I mean I also know that
you're performing The Sea of name and so
maybe the audio clips are a little bit
of a taste but maybe you could give us a
teeny preview uh into what to expect
this evening yeah yeah
um so I like to play on an iPad I my
whole thing with this was after leaving
mixmag was to try to
do the music industry backwards so
instead of being like a music journalist
I would be a journalist through the
distribution channels and using the sort
of uh the vinyl production and the
entire system of the music industry to
like pop up and send these like messages
out but also to completely destroy those
sort of formats and the hard genre lines
that Define we'll say the mood
algorithms of Spotify
um but what my live set is is the whole
point was to spend the least amount of
money to make the biggest most you know
powerful sound if you will
um but what you should should expect is
a lot of haptic kind of um
really live electronic playing like it
won't be the machine doing things that's
actually my own rhythms and how my own
gestures that will create these sort of
haptic rhythms that'll be spatialized
around the room and the hope is to take
one atkins's original setup of you know
the rhythm of the 808 drill machine and
the keys of the core game S10 and to
to just explode it further to take it
somewhere that
techno hasn't gone yet to this um we'll
call it absolute music or Everything
music
that's really amazing to hear we've been
thinking a lot about the total media
environment this weekend so super
excited to experience that thanks so
much we're so glad to have you cheers
[Applause]
[Music]
so uh it's we're having a lunch break
now run out